From Hansel minutes.com is Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
one 25. Recorded live Wednesday,
August 6th, 2008. Support for Hanselman it's
just provided by Tellerik rad
controls. The most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks accessibility
with developer socket shake. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes and I'm here
on the Microsoft campus in
Redmond Washington. I'm actually sitting
down with sucker Schick, a
developer from Microsoft consulting services
in the UK. So you've
come all this way and
I just happened to be
in Redmond. Thanks for taking
the time to sit down
with me. Hi, thanks for
allowing me to be here.
So we, we have a
shared interest in, in accessibility
and, and you are blind.
You're a blind developer and
you have a vested interest
and also a professional interest
in making accessible computing experiences.
Yeah, that's correct. Do you
focus mostly on websites or
do you focus on which
rich client are? All things
accessible? All things so patients,
and though we don't do
accessibility as part of my
main job. It's obviously in
my mind in everything I
do, whether it's websites, WinForms
WPF Silverlight. Now this might
be a kind of a
remedial question for you, but
I, and I spent a
lot of time using screen
readers and different applications for
accessibility, but let's start at
the beginning for people who
may not know what is
the experience for a blind
developer working on in windows,
whether it be on XP
or Vista, how are you
interacting with the machine? Okay.
So the traditional way is
keyboard and mouse monitor out.
So the first thing people
don't realize is that you
can't use the mouse. So
from an input perspective, everything
is done via the keyboard
and as a windows developer,
I'm sure you know, that
visual studio is just awesome
for keyboard shortcuts in terms
of output, then it speaker.
But so there's a program
in the background monitoring what's
happening and verbalizing that in
synthetic speech. And is there
one particular application that's like,
they know there's a narrator
that comes with with windows,
but I assume that's quickly
tossed aside. Yes, very quickly.
I use a program called
jaws. I should say this
category of programs is called
screen readers. And I use
one called Joel's, which is
quite popular. Now do applications
have to target jaws? Does
visual studio as a windows
application have to do something
to make it more accessible
to jaws or does jaws
just extra clever Jaws is
pretty clever. It hooks into
the video chain and sees
what's going into the monitor.
But what applications can do,
especially for custom controls is
what they call programmatic accessibility.
So that's allowing another program
to integrate your UI and
see what's there. Oh, so
how would I write it?
I mean, what would I
do to my application to
make it more accessible, to
let, to let someone peek
in and see what's happening?
So it's all about the
semantics, you know, adding meaning
to your UI, thinking beyond
a TD rectangle, in a
website, you're going to do
things like meaningful HTML markup
with Ajax. There's a new
standard called Aria, which means
you put some tags around
your other HTML and WPF.
And Silverlight, there's a system.windows
dot automation, namespace, lots of
goodness in there. And with
wind forms, it's MSA, Microsoft
active accessibility. So unfortunately there's
no one answer, But it
is about, it is about
semantics. I just kind of
started thinking to myself, do,
do we want what is
on the screen described? Really
not. You don't really care
what's going on in the
screen from a, from a
syntax perspective. Like, Hey, look,
he just put up a
toolbox. That's not interesting to
you. So it's interesting that
something appeared and it is
interesting that that thing is
a toolbox and how that's
presented to the user is,
you know, can be presented
in different ways. And the
great thing about the programmatic
accessibility is that it goes
beyond just a screen reader
and blindness. That's the same
thing that the windows Vista
speech recognition users. And, you
know, if you're a tester,
it's what you would use
for automated UI testing. Oh,
so the, the thing that
jaws is doing to interrogate
an application is the exact
same thing that someone who's
doing automated UI testing would
be using the same hooks.
Yes. And that's why I
think it's really great that
in Don history, WPF, they're
calling it UI automation, which
doesn't directly mean anything to
do with accessibility. It's just
for any reason, you'd have
to automate a UI. So
there's nothing specific to accessibility
that built into WPF. They
just simply make everything automateable
Exactly. So you write your
classes for your custom controls
to make them automateable and
yeah, that achieves the accessibility,
but that's not what they
call it. And that interests
you by not calling it
that, do you think it's
an easier sell because in
the, you know, I think
it always gets in through
the back door. It's like,
I think in the past
testers were a bit like,
Ooh, we have to use
accessibility to test was this
way, or the hope is
it'll get broader adoption. Well,
there's that sense that adding
accessibility, I mean, it just,
just by the virtue of
the fact that I use
the word adding, it's this
additional thing we have to
do, it's not bad enough.
We have to do Firefox
and opera. Now we have
this other screen reader that,
you know, air quotes, nobody
uses a, and now we
think of something like jaws
or a screen reader as
being another target. So you've
definitely got to do your,
your user testing. And that
seemed like not something most
developers are interested in by
guests organizations do that, but
as developers, yeah, it's just,
you're writing your classes, you're
writing your C sharp or
whatever code, and it's just
writing a bit more. So
every time you create a
custom control, you write a
bit more code to give
it Symantec's. So if I
were going to write an
application that, that, you know,
brought up a table, jaws
is gonna understand that I've
brought up a table of
let's say stock prices. Yes.
So if you're using a
standard data grid or whatever,
you know, a standard control,
it will recognize that. And
do you care as a,
as a vision impaired, blind
or blind person about sorting
and rearranging column headers and
this kind of things? Yeah,
definitely. Okay. So you're going
to customize a UI as
much as anybody just for
your tastes. Now what about
a chart? What does a
chart or pie chart mean
to you? If it's, again,
if it's got no semantics,
it means nothing, but if
you could represent the semantics,
for example, you know, if
you're having a pie chart,
which is a custom control,
which contains child controls of
slice, then it's, if each
slice had semantic information saying
it's labeled and it's present,
then that's really useful. Oh,
okay. And then in WPF,
I would, I would add
that bit of semantics. I
would decorate those. Unfortunately, you
can't just do it as
an attribute. There are these
automation peer classes you have
to, right. But they're not
that complicated. You implement a
various interfaces depending on the
type of your, what you
are a pattern it is.
And then of course the,
the added benefit or the
additional benefit is that now
I can test my pie
chart exactly. For semantics. Yeah.
Interesting. Interesting. Now when creating
a website, a lot of
people have this, I think
I call it checkbox accessibility,
where the government has mandated
that you must follow. And
in the U S it's
called section five Oh eight.
Yes. You know, if you
are going, if you are
in a large government organization
or if you're a bank
or whatever, your site must
be accessible, it's the web
equivalent of the wheelchair ramp.
Yeah. Just as a wheelchair
ramp might be something that
a building owner might not
embrace. Oftentimes the boss of
a website is not going
to be thrilled about the
idea that he has to
support accessibility. How do we
avoid that kind of attitude?
So I think you got
to target that at the
different types of people. So
I think your exec, you're
a big decision maker to
him. Really the law mandating
is a really good thing
because it makes it into
a fire on their desk,
which really needs to be
put out. And if it's
not a fire, it's not
going to get put out.
But when you're talking to
developers so forth, yeah. There's
the human part of accessibility,
but there's also the idea
that everyone is different. And,
you know, you might be
a teenager wanting to send
text messages without turning on
the lights. You might be
the businessman who's wants to
notify his boss. That he's
going to be late while
he's holding onto the rail
in the train. Oh, you
know, you could be hurt
your back. And you know,
you're lying in bed and
there's no computer you can
use at the moment. So
it's thinking of everyone is
different and you can't predict
what scenario different people are
going to use your software.
Well then also within each,
within each disability, whether it
be definition of blindness or,
or a physical disability, there
are, there are gradients. Yes.
One is typically not 100%
able-bodied or completely disabled just
as someone who's not entirely
lined. Yes. Now, would that
mean that you would appreciate
like a, a high contrast
option or, you know, what
it would have put a
blind person appreciate really, really
large fonts or flashes or
what other kinds of things
could one use Say the
semantics really takes care of,
you know, people who run
speech input or speech output,
or some agent interpreting the
software for them. But you're
right. There are things like
not only using color for
people who have colorblindness and
high contrast for people with
partial sight, which are equally
important. Jen, do, I haven't,
I've seen a lot of
I've used jaws and I've
actually, there's a really great
organization in New York called the
associated blind of New York that
can provide QA people who
are of low sites to
help you just catch up.
And they taught me a
lot about how things like
jaws work, but I haven't
seen a lot of applications
that sit in that middle
place. I mean, there's, there's
flat with his regular windows.
The way windows comes on
the one side of the
spectrum on the other side
of the spectrum, there's jaws,
which is everything things are
being read to you. Are
there applications that will say
a strobe, the monitor when
an email shows up, you
know, would that be a
useful thing to someone who
can seek shapes and colors?
I'm not sure, but the
type of thing you do
get is everything ranging from
someone who's just got, you
know, maybe getting elderly and
just wants to point the
mouse at things. It has
a little square, which magnifies
all the way through to
somebody who has a full
screen magnifier, which magnifies the
entire screen up to 32
times and can replace any
color on the screen with
any other color of their
choice and all crazy stuff
like that. And, you know,
track the mouse and the
keyboard and really amazing stuff.
Now, how often do you
get stuck? I'm curious, how
often do you find yourself
in a situation where you
just start? You just have
to basically start all F
flooring More than I'd like,
but certainly that does happen
a few times a day
just because something's not accessible
or Jules is obviously doing
a lot of low level
manipulation. So sometimes things go
there. And What does that,
what does that like? And
I it's, I'm not asking
the question very right, but
I'm trying to understand are
these state machine issues where
maybe you got caught in
a series of popups, like,
like just today and I
can, I've had LASIK eye
surgery. So even though I
was very, had very poor
vision growing up, I can
see fine. Now I got
caught in some kind of
a thing where we had
48 popups and I, internet
Explorer went absolutely bonkers. And
I had basically all their
flooring windows as fast as
they could come. What happens
when that happens to you?
Surely you've been caught in
a popup trip. Definitely. And
not so much pop ups,
but generally when things get
out of control, you know,
you can minimize everything with
your windows empty and then
old tab through what's there.
Or sometimes you just go
to the task manager and
kill it. Hello. Yep. So
you do the same thing.
Yes. You just blow. So
the idea of going into
task man, and figuring out
who's taking up the most,
a CPU and just blowing
them away is a common
thing. It's a universal. Yes.
So that's an interesting question.
How, how can you walk
me through what that is?
Like, I know that I
right. Click on the clock.
I hit task manager. I
find the header for CPU
and sort, I'm sorry. There
are always a million ways
to do things. For example,
running task, man dot exe,
or pressing control shift escape
will take you straight to
the task manager. It will.
Yeah. Control, shift, escape. Say,
I knew you would know
all the Hockeys. Yes. Many
years of learning all this.
And then from there, it's
a list. So with enlist,
you can use your first
letter navigation to jump to
a particular thing and all
the shortcut keys to end
and task, et cetera. How
do you tell it's the
one using the most CPU
cause task man moves underneath
you, you know, it's always
updating itself. So In Vista,
they actually now give the
column headers tab focus. So
you can tap to the
headers and left and right
between headers and press space
bar. Really? Yes. I, that
must have been a good
thing. I didn't know that
For that Joel's has a
virtual mouse and you had
to use the virtual mouse
to virtually right. Click on,
sorry. Left click on the
header. Really? Yeah. Which is
only three, four keystrokes, but
It's up. Yeah. And that's
it. So then you would,
so you can tab around
and jaws is telling you
that you're on a column
header. Exactly. Yeah. He hits
space. You do your sorting
ascending or descending, and then
you blow it away with
all, all E enter. Exactly.
Interesting. Interesting. I've got an
application right now. I'm in
writing called baby smash. Yes.
I've been reading. Have you
tried running baby smash? It
probably jaws would not like
it. I don't think I
must confess. I haven't actually
run it. It takes over
your system, you know? Yes.
All your hot keys. And
I was trying to think
what a low vision baby
would do with something like
that. I think if I,
it laughs and giggles and
it'll say the letter that
you press on, It's still
something I'm saying that much,
but I think it would
be great because I have
a friend who had a
blind baby and his favorite
thing was to set a
foot from the TV and
watch the sneaker because of
the really bright colored balls.
So from what I've read
about smash. Yeah. That's very
interesting. I could make a
low vision version of baby's
special because it's some WPF
though. Yeah. I could do
do a number of things.
That's very interesting. Yeah. Just
lots of bright colors. Now,
a lot of times people
run applications that will basically
sniff your website and tell
you whether or not it's
accessible or not. How valuable
are those kinds of analyzers?
I think they're really valuable,
valuable, as long as you
realize they won't get you
all the way there so
that maybe they'll get you
60, 70%. Those are my
numbers are making out of
the way there because certain
things like not have the
biggest problem with websites is
people don't put their old
texts and meaningful text on
their images. I'm, I'm guilty
of that on my own.
Yeah. On my blog. But
yeah, 10 years, 15 years
on, that's still the biggest
problem. And an analyzer can
be really good at that,
but then there's always the
human factor. Just taking something
as an old text, if
you were to automatedly say,
put something everywhere, then you
end up with, you know,
the space of dog gifts
everyone has. Oh yeah. I
love that. People will sometimes
put the word space or
there, and there's nothing more
annoying. That's I'll leave the
site if they do that.
Yeah. If it's something that
draws starts saying spacer. Yes,
sir. Every single space. And
then yeah. So sometimes you
still have empty old text
and sometimes the old text,
how descriptive should it be?
So yeah, the automated will
get you so far, but
humans always go the rest
of them. How often does
something that someone implemented on
a website in order to
make it a really pretty
or really accessible from a
visual perspective kind of cause
you problems. And the example
that I'm thinking of is
that for many years I
was using a tool that
would syntax highlight code samples
and basically just litter the
code samples with, with tags.
So that's, It depends how
it's done. I was actually
talking to the Scott, give
about this. Oh yeah. She
goes, he uses code samples,
his images. Exactly. This is
a horrible idea because I
talked to him about this
and you know, people were
complaining that it wasn't indented
properly and all the rest,
when it was just done
as HTML. So he went
to images, which is a
really good solution, except I
couldn't read any of his
tutorials and you know, we
had a really good laugh
over that. And that sounds
like Kind of a sad
laugh though. I mean, do
you think you'll change? He
definitely said that he's just
gonna, the solution is now
he's providing links to the
actual source code. So in
line it'll still be images,
but there'll be links to
it. Yeah. So those files
now I found it really
to there the solution that
I came up with. Cause
I didn't like my markup
being littered is now I
just have a pre tag.
I just put the code
straight in the pre tag.
I closed the pre, but
then I have a JavaScript,
a utility afterwards. It looks
for all the pre tags.
And then basically it has
a little engine on the
client side that will syntax
highlight. That's pretty clever. Well,
what is jaws? Does Josh
care when JavaScript starts running
around and manipulating the Dom
like that? Not really that
it has problems with it
updating the dome underneath it,
but there's this phenomenon called
behavioral JavaScript, which is like
what you said to put
a class attributes on things.
And then after the fact
in your onload, the JavaScript
goes and inject things into
the dome. Exactly what I'm
doing. So I have a
pre and then I'll say
a name equals code classical
C-sharp Exactly. Yes. And then
that's exactly the whole bit
behavioral JavaScript thing. So that
would work perfectly with doors.
And does that, I mean,
if you ended up here,
I don't know if you
read my blog or not,
but if you noticed, if
you have any trouble reading
my code samples. Okay, good.
Now I feel better, but
you're saying you've kept it
to yourself that my all
tags are, are shoddy at
best. So I will fix
that. Yes. And I think
in Dallas, DAS blog in
the RSS feeds, it has
these really weird images at
the bottom of every Oh,
okay. Yeah. So those really
weird images are actually one
pixel gifts. I'm sorry. And
what there are, is their
aggregator bugs basically when you
hit an item dos blog,
phone's home to let you
let me know that someone
read it. Ah, so they
should have it equals quotes,
quotes, empty. Cause then it'll
just be ignored because yeah.
So one time I visited
a CNN while I was
doing some studying of, of,
of accessibility. I did a
view source and I noticed
that they had a tiny
anchor tag that I had
never seen before. That said
skip to main content. Yes.
What is this about? So
that's some people get fanatical
about this. I don't use
it. It's it's that you
can just press enter on
that and it'll skip you
past all the navigation bar.
Cause something like jaws is
gonna treat your webpage seriously,
you'll go through. So it
linearizes the entire page Exactly.
Especially today because everyone's using
tables and if you're first,
you know, if you have
a left cell and a
right cell, then the left
cell will be read first.
Okay. So then you show
up on a cnn.com site.
And the very first thing
that has focused is the
sh skip to main content.
You just hit space bar
enter and then you've moved
on beyond all the ads
and yeah, exactly. Interesting HTML
file. If I think we'll
actually have a sidebar tag,
so that goes back to
making it a semantic thing.
Now that's an interesting point
that you're bringing up because
of HTML five, you've been
surfing the web for, for
many years and you've been
doing it, I assume all
this time as a blind
individual. Yes. Have you noticed,
or do you have a
sense, not just in jaws
and screen reader, technology improving,
but is, is HTML getting
better and easier for you
to understand going from a
table based layout with one
pixel gifts to the semantic
web, the whole CSS, Zen
garden style of, of development
with this? I don't know.
And I don't think so.
The one thing to bear
in mind is jaws. You
could consider it as a
user agent in its own,
right. Is going through internet
Explorer or Firefox, but it's
interpreting the dome itself. So
as the web has changed,
so jaws has changed, do
the best it can to
make it a good experience.
And you'll see us as
then garden that is, you
know, the utopia, the ultimate
where web accessibility should be.
But no one does that.
That brings up an interesting
question. You know, I've been
playing with this iPhone lately
and you know, the iPhone
is a, there's a little
mini Safari, so it's a
full browser, but DAS blog
and my blog have the
ability to sniff a user
agent and apply an alternate
style sheet basically. And not
just the style sheet, but
a complete template. The reason
I say that is that
when I first started playing
with the iPhone, I said,
you know, I'll sniff the
iPhone and I'll return the
mobile version of my site.
Okay. That means no navigation,
no sidebar, just content, content
content. Would that be the
kind of thing that would
be appropriate or inappropriate? Should
I detect a jaws screen
reader and call that a
mobile site and give you
the tiny version of my
site From my point of
view, that would be great.
However, I was actually talking
to some of the accessibility
people and because of privacy
concerns, they don't pass that
information along. There's no way
for me to tell you
visited my site. No, because
I could tell you were
blind and then I would
discriminate against you by giving
you lousy content. So, you
know, from a developer's point
of view, you know, they
folks could easily say, Oh,
someone is using the automation,
API APIs. Let's put a
HTTP header in, but that's
a whole privacy issue. I
never thought about that. The
idea that it would be
a privacy issue, I guess
it would. I mean, that
might be well, but I
could understand that that might
be an aspect of your
personality, that you're just not
interested in sharing The stern,
but also I think if
you're an insurance site to
do your online sign up,
and if someone can tell
that you're a disabled person
wanting insurance, I mean, there's
no, There's no deaf people
use your agent. I don't
suppose there ought to be
a fine person user agent,
right? No, there would be
speech recognition potentially, but not
a really user ID. The
idea that, you know, we
have these senses and some
of us have five and
some have four. Does that
mean that we all get
our own user agent? Of
course not. I mean, I
can see the argument against
that, but I think We
want it to have. So
because really, I know I
have this crazy idea, which
isn't happening anytime soon that
if you have, if all
you, you always are semantic,
then why not have customized
user interfaces for whatever anyone
understands likes, prefers. I mean,
I would like to provide
the best experience possible. And
I've got this ability to
sniff a browser. You know,
if you visit my site
on a Blackberry, you get
the tiny version. And I
think that that version would
be so much easier for
a jaws screen reader. Yes,
I think it definitely works.
I think what I'll do
is I'll just make it
And available as a clicking
option at the bottom and
I'll set a cookie and
if somebody hits a site
and they want to stay
in the mobile version, then
they can do that. That's
cool. And I think in
the past, having a text
only version for blind people
was frowned upon. But these
days when everything's coming from
the same database, there's nothing
too wrong about it. I
think with the advent of,
of skinning and theming, I
think that the first example
that people recognize that not
everyone wants to read your
eight point per Danna, tiny,
tiny font was the, you
know, the adamant of those
little, a minus a plus
buttons that sit at the
top of a page. I
don't sure if you've seen
these or not, but this
is the, make the font
bigger with JavaScript or make
the font smaller with JavaScript.
And you know, my parents
love that. Cool. My dad
uses that. Why shouldn't there
be a, you know, click,
if you don't want to
see any of this other
stuff, although someone might want
to re use that to
remove ads. Of course, I
guess that means applying people
are impervious to two ads,
I guess. So, so I
get the whole bit of
frame beginning and frame end
for VM. I frames by
don't ever get to read
the ad. So I get
almost the worst of both
worlds. So you know, It
doesn't dig, dig into the
eye frame and you don't
get to see all this
flash add guard. Sure. So
with Google ads, I don't
think I can talk a
little bit of Google out
there, but I never find
the text from the ads
We could be trying to
sell you something very important
that you're missing out on
this history and, you know,
actually all my advertisers of
having to put all tags
on the, on the ad.
So you're probably catching those.
Okay, interesting. So is it
possible though, to have a
really pretty website that doesn't,
doesn't scrimp on the pretty
on the, on the, on
the, on the, on the
web 2.0 and the RIA
and still be really accessible?
Absolutely. I'm really passionate that
I want to be using
the same things, the same
really lovely user experiences that
everyone else uses, because that
is what the mainstream web
2.0 world is. So as
an example demo, I made
a world map, which was
an Atlas totally in Silverlight.
And you could hover the
mouse over the different regions
and it would show you
a flag fluttering in the
wind and information about that
country. And that was all
made accessible and keyboard accessible
and actually to a blind
person, all you'd see is
a list box of countries.
And you might never know
that it's a pretty map,
but it's the same thing
that anyone else would appreciate.
You'll give us a link
to that and I'll post
that on the, definitely on
the site. Now, if you
don't mind my asking, how
did, how did you get
started? How'd you get started
in computers? It's a funny
story. So I want you
to lost my sight when
I seven. And at that
point they decided to do,
I was going to spend
a year learning braille and
getting up to speed with
being blind and on top
of that, because I had
some time left over, they
told me to type, and
I guess I tried all
these creative endeavors, like drawing
and woodwork, but that meant
the teacher had to be
there. This is all, you
know, when I was about
10 11, and I eventually
got to writing stories, I
really liked making things which
other people could read. It
meant a lot to me
then. And yeah, that led
to programming when I was
about 13. And it all
started from there. Sweet back
creation. I mean, you want
it to produce things that
other people could, could interact
with. Yes, that's really how
I started. And still it's
like, I think like many
of us developers, it's the
creative process and making new
stuff, which is really cool.
You, accessibility is getting better.
It sounds like you're pretty
positive in your thinking that
it's just getting more, more
and more accessible. I'm pretty
sure things are getting more
and more accessible, but definitely
there's a lot more awareness.
And going back to where
we started, the laws do
help with that. But also
I think the world is
changing. We have RSS feeds,
which give you data and
XML. You have a lot
more awareness of multimodal user
interfaces. Like people are suddenly
saying, well, we need a
keyboard interface and a touch
and face. So to tell
them that why not have
a voice input and a
voice output is two more
interfaces. You know, I think
technology is helping us to,
you know, open people's eyes,
pun intended to the different
options and alternatives. Cool. Well,
thanks so much for sitting
down with me today, and
this has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and I'll
see you again next week.